DOCS:  Added a troubleshooting guide to Tempo data source docs (#116640)
grafana/grafana: docs/sources/datasources/tempo/troubleshooting/index.md

weight: 600
refs:
  configure-tempo-data-source:
    - pattern: /docs/grafana/
      destination: /docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/datasources/tempo/configure-tempo-data-source/
    - pattern: /docs/grafana-cloud/
      destination: /docs/grafana-cloud/connect-externally-hosted/data-sources/tempo/configure-tempo-data-source/
  tempo-query-editor:
    - pattern: /docs/grafana/
      destination: /docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/datasources/tempo/query-editor/
    - pattern: /docs/grafana-cloud/
      destination: /docs/grafana-cloud/connect-externally-hosted/data-sources/tempo/query-editor/
  service-graph:
    - pattern: /docs/grafana/
      destination: /docs/grafana/<GRAFANA_VERSION>/datasources/tempo/service-graph/
    - pattern: /docs/grafana-cloud/
      destination: /docs/grafana-cloud/connect-externally-hosted/data-sources/tempo/service-graph/
  private-data-source-connect:
    - pattern: /docs/grafana/
      destination: /docs/grafana-cloud/connect-externally-hosted/private-data-source-connect/
    - pattern: /docs/grafana-cloud/
      destination: /docs/grafana-cloud/connect-externally-hosted/private-data-source-connect/
---

# Troubleshoot Tempo data source issues

> This document provides solutions to common issues you may encounter when configuring or using the Tempo data source in Grafana.

Reviewer: For each of the steps, should you link to any existing documentation that explains how to do that step? For example, when you say verify the TLS settings, where would someone find that information? Is it set in the Tempo data source or in the Tempo config file?

Reviewer: There may be useful info here for Cloud users who use Alloy. There are steps for checking traces are received, checking a config file, alloy component status, auth configuration - https://grafana.com/docs/grafana-cloud/send-data/traces/set-up/traces-with-alloy/#troubleshoot

## Scope of this guide

This guide focuses on issues related to connecting Grafana to Tempo and using the data source features. For issues with Tempo itself, refer to the Tempo product documentation:

- [Troubleshoot Tempo](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/<TEMPO_VERSION>/troubleshooting/) - General Tempo troubleshooting, including ingestion failures and server-side errors.
- [Unable to find traces](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/<TEMPO_VERSION>/troubleshooting/querying/unable-to-see-trace/) - Traces missing due to ingestion, sampling, or retention issues.
- [Too many requests error](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/<TEMPO_VERSION>/troubleshooting/querying/too-many-requests-error/) - Query capacity limits and 429 errors.
- [Query issues](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/<TEMPO_VERSION>/troubleshooting/querying/) - Server-side query failures, bad blocks, and performance tuning.

> 

Reviewer: Additional docs for Cloud users: 
- [Troubleshoot Grafana Cloud Traces](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana-cloud/send-data/traces/troubleshoot/), which covers quick checks, ingestion issues, traceQL and search,  service graph, exemplars, and rate limiting and retry.
- [Investigate traces with Grafana Assistant](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana-cloud/send-data/traces/investigate-traces-with-assistant/) - Use Grafana Assistant to help troubleshoot any issues. 
- [Troubleshoot traces collection with Alloy](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana-cloud/send-data/traces/set-up/traces-with-alloy/#troubleshoot)

## Connection errors

These errors occur when Grafana cannot establish or maintain a connection to the Tempo instance.

### Unable to connect to Tempo

**Error message:** "Unable to connect to Tempo" or "dial tcp: connection refused"

**Cause:** Grafana cannot establish a network connection to the Tempo instance.

**Solution:**

> 1. Verify that the Tempo instance is running and accessible.

Reviewer: Do you have these steps documented any where? For example, is there a validate step in the Set up docs?  If so, consider linking to that procedure.

1. Check that the URL is correct in the data source configuration. The default Tempo HTTP port is `3200`.
1. Ensure there are no firewall rules blocking the connection between Grafana and Tempo.
1. For Grafana Cloud, ensure you have configured [Private data source connect](ref:private-data-source-connect) if your Tempo instance is not publicly accessible.
1. Verify the protocol (HTTP or HTTPS) matches your Tempo configuration.

### Connection timeout

**Error message:** "Connection timed out" or "context deadline exceeded"

**Cause:** The connection to Tempo timed out before receiving a response.

**Solution:**

1. Check the network latency between Grafana and Tempo.

> 1. Verify that Tempo is not overloaded or experiencing performance issues.

Reviewer: Tempo has a set of mixin dashboards for monitoring and seeing how Tempo is doing. This information is under [Monitor Tempo](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/latest/operations/monitor/) docs. Maybe a good place to add a link here?

1. Increase the **Timeout** setting in the data source configuration under **Additional settings**.
1. Check if any network devices (load balancers, proxies) are timing out the connection.
1. For large trace queries, consider reducing the time range or adding more specific filters.

### TLS/SSL connection failures

**Error message:** "TLS handshake failed" or "x509: certificate signed by unknown authority"

**Cause:** There is a mismatch between the TLS settings in Grafana and what Tempo supports or requires.

**Solution:**

> 1. Verify that Tempo has a valid TLS certificate if HTTPS is enabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Verify that Tempo has a [valid TLS certificate if HTTPS is enabled](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/datasources/tempo/configure-tempo-data-source/#authentication).
```

1. Check that the certificate is trusted by the Grafana server.
1. If using a self-signed certificate, configure the **TLS/SSL Auth Details** in the data source settings.
1. Ensure the certificate's Common Name (CN) or Subject Alternative Name (SAN) matches the hostname used in the URL.

For additional information on setting up TLS encryption with Tempo, refer to [Configure TLS communication](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/<TEMPO_VERSION>/configuration/network/tls/).

## Authentication errors

These errors occur when there are issues with authentication credentials or permissions.

### Authentication failed

**Error message:** "401 Unauthorized" or "403 Forbidden"

**Cause:** The authentication credentials are invalid or the user doesn't have permission to access Tempo.

**Solution:**

> 1. Verify that the authentication credentials (username/password or API key) are correct.

Reviewer: It would be helpful for a user to have pointers on where to look for places to fix these things. 

Also, there are authentication configuration in the Alloy and OTel Collector settings. If these were set incorrectly, would that also cause the same error message? 

If they are using Cloud, then does the Cloud Access Policy have the right permissions? It would be helpful to list the required permissions and then link to the actual procedure for checking these things. For example, traces:write.

Reviewer: Also related: how to locate a stack's URL, user, and password - https://grafana.com/docs/grafana-cloud/send-data/traces/set-up/locate-url-user-password/

1. Check that the user or service account has the required permissions.
1. Ensure the authentication method selected in the data source matches what Tempo expects.
1. For Grafana Cloud, verify that your API key has the correct scopes.

### Multi-tenant authentication issues

**Error message:** "Unauthorized" when using multi-tenant Tempo

> **Cause:** The tenant ID (X-Scope-OrgID header) is missing or incorrect.

Reviewer: @zhehao-grafana Let me rephase to make sure I'm understanding your comment. The Tenant ID is configured in the Alloy or OTel Collector configuration not the Tempo data source, per [Multitenancy Tempo doc](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/latest/operations/manage-advanced-systems/multitenancy/). 

And for more information about tenant IDs themselves, refer to https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/latest/configuration/tenant-ids/

**Solution:**

> 1. Verify that the `X-Scope-OrgID` header is configured correctly in the data source settings.

Reviewer: As Zhehao pointed out, this isn't set in the data source. It's configured in either the Collector or Alloy, depending on what the tracing set up is using.

1. Check that the authenticated user has access to the specified tenant.
1. For cross-tenant queries, ensure all specified tenants are accessible.

For more information about multi-tenancy, refer to [Enable multitenancy](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/<TEMPO_VERSION>/operations/multitenancy/).

## Query errors

These errors occur when there are issues with TraceQL queries or trace lookups.

### Trace not found

**Error message:** "Trace not found" or "trace ID not found"

**Cause:** The specified trace ID doesn't exist in Tempo or is outside the retention period.

**Solution:**

> 1. Verify the trace ID is correct and complete.

Reviewer: Providing a quick TraceQL query might be useful for this. refer to https://grafana.com/docs/grafana-cloud/send-data/traces/traces-query-editor/traceql-cookbook/ for examples.

1. Enable **Enable time range** in the data source settings and adjust the time shift values to search a broader range.
1. Verify the trace was successfully ingested by Tempo.

### TraceQL syntax errors

**Error message:** "parse error" or "unexpected token"

**Cause:** The TraceQL query contains syntax errors.

**Solution:**

1. Verify the query follows [TraceQL syntax](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/<TEMPO_VERSION>/traceql).
1. Check that all braces, parentheses, and quotes are balanced.
1. Ensure attribute names are correctly formatted. For attributes with special characters, use bracket notation: `span["http.status_code"]`.
1. Use the **Search** query builder to generate valid TraceQL queries if you're unfamiliar with the syntax.
1. Verify operators are used correctly. Common operators include `=`, `!=`, `=~`, `>`, `<`, `>=`, `<=`.

### Query returns no results

**Cause:** The query is valid but doesn't match any traces.

**Solution:**

1. Expand the time range to search a broader period.
1. Verify the attribute names and values exist in your traces.
1. Check that the attribute names match exactly, as they're case-sensitive.

> 1. Use the **Search** query builder to explore available attributes and values.

Reviewer: Consider linking to the query editor doc. Might be useful reference here. Might be useful to send people to Traces Drilldown as well for additional exploration.

1. Start with a broader query and progressively add filters to narrow results.
1. Verify traces are being ingested into Tempo by querying for a known trace ID.

### Query timeout

**Error message:** "context deadline exceeded" or "query timeout"

**Cause:** The query took too long to execute.

**Solution:**

1. Reduce the time range to limit the amount of data scanned.
1. Add more specific filters to narrow the search scope.
1. Use indexed attributes in your queries when possible.

> 1. Consider enabling [TraceQL metrics](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/<TEMPO_VERSION>/metrics-generator/) for aggregate queries.

Reviewer: Tempo OSS has to enable TraceQL metrics in the configuration. TraceQL metrics are [enabled by default](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana-cloud/send-data/traces/configure/metrics-generator/#traceql-metrics-and-metrics-generator) for Cloud users. 
```suggestion
1. Consider enabling [TraceQL metrics](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/<TEMPO_VERSION>/metrics-from-traces/metrics-queries/configure-traceql-metrics/) for aggregate queries.
```

1. Increase the query timeout in Tempo configuration if appropriate.

## Streaming issues

These issues relate to the streaming feature that displays partial query results.

### Streaming not working

**Cause:** Results don't appear incrementally and only display after the full query completes.

**Solution:**

1. Verify that streaming is enabled in the Tempo data source settings.
1. Check that Tempo is version 2.2 or later.

> 1. Ensure `stream_over_http_enabled: true` is set in Tempo's configuration.

Reviewer: Replace the first step with this: 
```suggestion
1. For Tempo users, verify that streaming is enabled: your configuration has `stream_over_http_enabled: true`.  Refer to [Streaming](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/<TEMPO_VERSON>/datasources/tempo/configure-tempo-data-source/#streaming) in the Tempo documentation.
  Note that streaming is available for Grafana Cloud users by default. 
1. Verify that it **Streaming** is enabled in your [Tempo data source settings](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/datasources/tempo/configure-tempo-data-source/#streaming).
```

1. If your Tempo instance is behind a load balancer or proxy that doesn't support gRPC or HTTP2, disable streaming.
1. Check that the browser supports streaming responses.

### Partial results or streaming errors

**Error message:** "stream error" or incomplete results during streaming

**Cause:** The streaming connection was interrupted.

**Solution:**

1. Check network stability between the browser and Grafana.
1. Verify that proxies or load balancers aren't terminating long-lived connections.
1. Disable streaming and use standard queries if issues persist.
1. Check Tempo logs for any errors related to streaming.

## Service graph issues

These issues relate to the Service Graph visualization.

### Service graph not displaying

> **Cause:** The Service Graph view shows no data or an empty graph.

Reviewer: Again, there are some differences for Cloud vs OSS users. 
Cloud Traces users: Service graph is empty: https://grafana.com/docs/grafana-cloud/send-data/traces/troubleshoot/#troubleshoot-service-graph-and-red-metrics 

Also, consider linking in here to the Service graph docs in the Tempo data source: https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/datasources/tempo/service-graph/

- **Grafana Cloud + self-managed Tempo via PDC**—you use Grafana Cloud but connect to your own Tempo instance through [Private data source connect](ref:private-data-source-connect).

Where troubleshooting steps differ between these setups, the guide calls it out. Sections labeled _Grafana Cloud only_ or _self-managed Tempo_ apply only to those environments.

For issues with Tempo itself (not the Grafana data source), refer to the Tempo product documentation:

- [Troubleshoot Tempo](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/<TEMPO_VERSION>/troubleshooting/) - General Tempo troubleshooting, including ingestion failures and server-side errors.
- [Unable to find traces](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/<TEMPO_VERSION>/troubleshooting/querying/unable-to-see-trace/) - Traces missing due to ingestion, sampling, or retention issues.
- [Too many requests error](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/<TEMPO_VERSION>/troubleshooting/querying/too-many-requests-error/) - Query capacity limits and 429 errors.
- [Query issues](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/<TEMPO_VERSION>/troubleshooting/querying/) - Server-side query failures, bad blocks, and performance tuning.

> Additional resources for Grafana Cloud:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Resources for troubleshooting tracings in Grafana Cloud

Additional resources for Grafana Cloud:
```
